---
date: 2021-07-01
description: Upgrade notes for Sprout v4.40.0
---

Redirect sprout.barrelstrengthdesign.com/docs/changelog => updates
support/feature-requests => support/support
support/bugs => support/support

# Upgrading to v4.40.0

While the author experience remains largely unchanged Sprout v10 provides an simplified plugin architecture under the hood, introduces the Sprout Framework plugin, and removes the need for a number of dependencies that were causing several permission and migration issues over the last year. Designers and Developers will want to read through these upgrade notes carefully - a lot has changed.

This release adds support for Lite and Pro editions of Sprout Reports and new Report Visualizations.

## Upgrading

1. Update Craft to the latest version
2. Update all Sprout plugins to the most recent version before upgrading to v4.40.0
3. Update all Sprout plugins to their v4.40.0 versions
4. Install the Sprout Framework plugin
5. Review the Sprout Framework Overview below
6. Review the 'Breaking Changes' section below for your specific plugins

## Sprout Framework Overview

In Sprout v10, all of the underlying code has moved to the Sprout Framework plugin. Individual plugins like Sprout Forms, Sprout Reports, etc. are now just shells that reference the code in the Sprout Framework plugin for all the features they provide.

This allows us to share features between the Sprout plugins, offer additional packages for our plugins, and keep our plugins more aligned with the Craft way of doing things - which the previous architecture was deviating from.

Moving forward:

- The only plugin that will have updates is the Sprout Framework plugin
- The individual Sprout plugins will all get updated when you update the Sprout Framework plugin
- All features will be provided as Sprout Modules that can be enabled or disabled
- You can still install a single Sprout plugin and the only modules that you will see will be the modules available to that plugin
- All plugins that use a given module will have the same settings

## Changes in All Sprout Plugins 

- Renamed sprout-base module to `sprout`. This will be referred to as the Sprout Module whenever referenced.
- variables, sprout.app, etc.
- Improve Notes and examples in src/config.php override and add note that this file exists in the docs.

## Breaking Changes

### Sprout Forms

- Updated Resource loading Asset Bundles for front-end forms. People may need to migrate over? Or can keep the old syntax? I think so... same filenames.

### Fields

- REMOVED Notes field. Migrated to UI Elements.
  Craft's new UI Elements replaces the need for the Sprout Notes field? and others?

UI elements – Add custom headings, tips, warnings, and horizontal rules to your field layouts. You can even add custom UI elements based on Twig templates. (Yes, plugins can register additional UI elements as well!)
- Release an update on 3.x for Notes field that notifies folks we'll be deprecating the Rich Text and HTML options and only migrating to Markdown via Craft's Tips/Warning UI elements in the future.

Review Phone field. In this case, it appears to be returning a string of a number if I kill the script and Craft::dd($value) in the normalizeValue method. But, ideally we normalize this to be a form model so where does this string value come from?
https://sprout.straightupcraft.com.ddev.site/admin/entries/sproutFieldExamples/21-field-test

So it looks like our Phone Field => Plain Text migration during the Craft 3 upgrade fails in some scenarios, leading to a situation where you may have a phone field that has old number values from before the migration (1231231234) and new format international JSON values for anything that was saved after the update.
It's hard for us to clean these up, because we don't know the international code we should put the numbers into, so old values need to be updated manually. Or we need to switch all fields to PlainText leading to potentially plain text fields with the new JSON values now. \<sigh\>
Build a utility that identifies where these exist and provide SQL queries that can identify all the IDs of the fields in question (all phone fields in global context that don't contain a "{" or that do contain one) and another query that uses those IDs to update and CONCAT the other format.

			And migrated phone field as straight numbers 1231234111 vs {"country":"AS","phone":"707-654-1234"}
				Make sure phone gets migrated properly or converted to Plain Text field.
				We were supposed to migrate these to plain text in the upgrade to Craft 3... see where this fails or gets undone.

			Review OLD Sprout Fields migrations (And make sure we're dealing with global/sproutForms scope properly)
				m180221_161521_update_type.php <= this changes the classname before the following migrations run their queries looking for the old class name.
				m180221_161522_notes_fields.php
				m180221_161523_phone_fields.php
				m180221_161524_email_select_fields.php
				m180221_161525_regular_expression_fields.php
				m180221_161526_link_fields.php
				m180221_161527_email_fields.php
				m180221_161528_hidden_fields.php
				m180221_161529_invisible_fields.php

			# REVIEW THINGS
			SELECT *
			FROM craft_content
			WHERE field_phoneSprout LIKE '%{%';

			SELECT *
			FROM craft_content
			WHERE field_phoneSprout NOT LIKE '%{%';

			# GET IDS OF TARGET COLUMN DATA
			SELECT id 
			FROM craft_content
			WHERE field_phoneSprout LIKE '%{%';

			SELECT id
			FROM craft_content
			WHERE field_phoneSprout NOT LIKE '%{%';

			# UPDATE 
			UPDATE craft_content
			SET field_phoneSprout = CONCAT('{"country":"AF","phone":"',field_phoneSprout,'"}')
			WHERE field_phoneSprout NOT LIKE '%{%'
				AND id = @id;
				
			UPDATE craft_content AS table1
			    JOIN
			    (
			        SELECT id
			        FROM craft_content
			        WHERE field_phoneSprout NOT LIKE '%{%'
			    ) table2
			    ON table1.id = table2.id
			SET table1.field_phoneSprout = CONCAT('{"country":"AF","phone":"',table1.field_phoneSprout,'"}');


### SEO

- Upgrading Sitemaps and Redirects will not retain an alternateName value as they are now separate from SEO.

### Reports

- Make sure m200700_000000_add_reports_editions targets the right editions before release.

## Database Audit

- ADD A MANUAL DATA MIGRATION STEP TO DATABASE AUDIT UTILITY
